---
name: "Fernando Costa Netto"
role: Photojournalist
portrait: sniper_alley_fernando_costa_netto_12.jpg
photos:
  - file: sniper_alley_fernando_costa_netto_12.jpg
    credit: "(c) Fernando Costa Netto"
---
Fernando Costa Netto is a journalist, photographer, entrepreneur and owner partner of DOC Galeria. He is the creator of Mostra SP de Fotografia, an event of occupation of Vila Madalena, São Paulo neighborhood, by photography. He is also one of the creators of Trip Magazine and other editorial projects such as the magazines VeniceMag (1993) and Boom (1994). In 2005, Fernando was the editor-in-chief of the Notícias Populares newspaper, part of Folha Media Group. Between 1997- 2000, he was a member of Polaroid SX70 photo collective. Some of his most important exhibitions and cultural activities are: “Fotocolecionismo”, Luisa Strina Gallery [1999]; “Imagens da Violência, Retrato da Exclusão”, MIS - Museu da Imagem e do Som [2000]; “Oscar Niemeyer, um Olhar sobre a Obra”, Paparazzi Gallery [2001]; SX70, Galeria Vermelho [2002]; “Dear Sarajevo”, a photo documentary during the war in Bosnia 1993-1994 and 10 years after, 2006 at Caixa Cultural. The exhibition opened the SP International Photography Month [2007]. Fernando was the curator of “Futebol Majestade” to celebrate the May Day with unpublished pictures of Pele, from the archives of Última Hora newspaper directed by Samuel Wainer. He also organized and curated the exhibition “Peladas”, with images of football played on the streets of 30 different countries by photographer Caio Vilela. He organized the exhibition “PIIOTOS WTC 1973-2011 SP/NY“ shown simultaneously in São Paulo, at Espaço SOMA and in New York at 1500 Gallery, as a remembrance of the 10 years of the attacks of September 11th in New York. As a journalist, editor and photographer, Fernando travelled through Peru, Mexico, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Tobago, Venezuela, USA, South Africa, Indonesia, India, Nepal, France, Spain, Bosnia, Israel, Palestine, Indonesia, among others. Fernando is a mentor of ASAS Institute, a Project of Redbull for young talents. http://www.docfoto.com.br https://www.instagram.com/fcostanetto/
